.\" Man page for alavai. Install to $(mandir)/man1/alavai.1
.TH ALAVAI 1 "2026-06-24" "alavai 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
alavai \- lightweight Tailscale client for Linux with one-click tailnet switching
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B alavai
.I command
.RI [ args ...]
.br
.B alavai
.BR \-h | \-\-help
.br
.B alavai
.BR \-V | \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B alavai
is a lightweight, native graphical client for the
.BR tailscale (1)
mesh VPN. It provides a system\-tray icon, a main window, and a small
command\-line interface, with a focus on switching between configured tailnets
(Tailscale login profiles) in one click.
.PP
alavai communicates directly with the local
.B tailscaled
daemon over its LocalAPI unix socket; it does not bundle the Tailscale client
library. For most operations the current user must be configured as the
Tailscale
.IR operator
(see
.B REQUIREMENTS
below).
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Surfaces
.TP
.B tray
Run the system\-tray daemon. Exposes live connection status and a one\-click
tailnet switcher via a StatusNotifierItem icon. Left\-click opens the main
window. This is the long\-running foreground process.
.TP
.B gui
Open the main window (peer list, exit nodes, routes, diagnostics, and the
tailnet switcher).
.SS Status and tailnets
.TP
.B status
Show the current connection status and active tailnet.
.TP
.B tailnets
List the configured tailnets (Tailscale login profiles); the active one is
marked.
.TP
.B switch \fITAILNET\fR
Switch to the tailnet identified by
.IR TAILNET ,
which may be its ID, profile name, or domain (for example
.BR karo.co.nz ).
.TP
.B peers
List the peers on the active tailnet with details (online state, address,
relay, routes, traffic).
.SS Diagnostics
.TP
.B netcheck
Run a connectivity check (UDP, IPv4/IPv6, NAT traversal, captive portal,
preferred relay and per\-region latencies). This invokes the
.BR tailscale (1)
CLI.
.TP
.B prefs
Show the current preferences (exit node, routes, and related toggles).
.TP
.B watch
Stream live state changes from the daemon's event bus. Intended for debugging.
.SS Exit nodes and routes
These commands change daemon preferences and require operator permission.
.TP
.B exit\-node \fIPEER\fR
Use
.IR PEER
(a peer's name, ID, or IP address) as this machine's exit node. Pass
.B none
to stop using an exit node.
.TP
.B accept\-routes \fISTATE\fR
Accept subnet routes advertised by other nodes.
.I STATE
is
.B on
or
.BR off .
.TP
.B lan\-access \fISTATE\fR
Keep access to the local LAN while an exit node is in use.
.I STATE
is
.B on
or
.BR off .
.TP
.B advertise\-exit\-node \fISTATE\fR
Advertise this machine as an exit node for the tailnet (subject to admin
approval).
.I STATE
is
.B on
or
.BR off .
.TP
.B advertise\-routes \fR[\fICIDR\fR ...]
Advertise the given subnet routes (for example
.BR 192.168.1.0/24 ).
Pass no arguments to clear all advertised routes.
.TP
.B help \fR[\fICOMMAND\fR]
Print help, optionally for a specific command.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a help message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Run the tray daemon (typically from an autostart entry):
.PP
.RS
.nf
alavai tray
.fi
.RE
.PP
Switch to a tailnet and confirm:
.PP
.RS
.nf
alavai switch karo.co.nz
alavai status
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use a peer as exit node, then stop using it:
.PP
.RS
.nf
alavai exit\-node my\-exit\-host
alavai exit\-node none
.fi
.RE
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.TP
.B Tailscale daemon
The
.B tailscaled
daemon must be running. Most actions require the invoking user to be the
Tailscale operator:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo tailscale set \-\-operator=$USER
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B tailscale CLI
The
.BR tailscale (1)
command is required for the
.B netcheck
subcommand.
.TP
.B System tray host
The
.B tray
command requires a StatusNotifierItem host (such as KDE Plasma, GNOME with the
AppIndicator extension, or most tray\-capable window managers).
.TP
.B Browser opener
.B xdg\-open
(from
.BR xdg\-utils )
is used to open the admin console and interactive\-login URLs.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /run/tailscale/tailscaled.sock
The tailscaled LocalAPI unix socket alavai connects to. If absent,
.I /var/run/tailscale/tailscaled.sock
is tried.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B alavai
exits 0 on success and non\-zero if a command fails (for example, the daemon
cannot be reached or the user is not the operator).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR tailscale (1),
.BR tailscaled (1)
.PP
Project home:
.UR https://github.com/alex-poor/alavai
.UE
.SH BUGS
Report issues at
.UR https://github.com/alex-poor/alavai/issues
.UE .
.SH AUTHOR
alavai is maintained by Alex Poor and contributors.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026. Licensed under the GNU General Public License version 3 or
later (GPL\-3.0\-or\-later).
